# NYU Bioinformatics Capstone Project
Repository for NYU Capstone Project with Dr. Flowers

# Contents
* `report.qmd`
* `scripts/utility.R`
* `scripts/temp.sh`

# Tool Method Plan
1. Input human reads
2. Align to human reference genome
3. Capture variants, only capture stop codons
4. Predict effects

# Background and Purpose
A nonsense mutation, or premature stop mutation, is a change in the DNA sequence that causes a protein to terminate earlier than expected. This would result in a truncated, and likely nonfunctional protein that can disrupt the normal regulation of an organism and cause disease. To mitigate this issue, eukaryotes have a nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) surveillance pathway that degrades mRNA transcripts with premature stop codons.

However, a previous study has shown evidence of mutant transcripts escaping NMD and their translations did not always lead to loss of function (Anderson, 2017). This sheds light on the need for a predictive method for loss of function mutations.

Current functional effect predictors underperform on non loss of function mutations (Gerasimavicius et al., 2022). The purpose of this tool is to identify early stop-codons and predict a loss-of-function for the protein.

# References
* Anderson, J. (2017). mRNA processing in mutant zebrafish lines generated by chemical and CRISPR-mediated mutagenesis produces unexpected transcripts that escape nonsense-mediated decay. PLoS Genet, 13(11), e1007105. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1007105

* Gerasimavicius, L., Livesey, B. J., & Marsh, J. A. (2022). Loss-of-function, gain-of-function and dominant-negative mutations have profoundly different effects on protein structure. Nature Communications, 13, 3895. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31686-6
